---
title:  "In defence of plaintext"
layout: default
---

**The web is a mess.** And I'm not talking about the problems with HTML, with CSS, with JavaScript, with HTTPS itself; others have complained about those standards much better than I ever could. No, today I want to talk about the way that we, as users and consumers of the web, interact with it, and how fundamentally flawed that interaction is.

Modern websites follow what I call a *prescriptivist design*. The designers of a website determine exactly how they wish a website to appear to each user. Often, a mockup will be drawn up and then implemented by teams of programmers; in fact, much of modern web development has nothing to do with the content of the website, and everything to do with the exact details of how it appears to each user. 

This approach completely neglects the original vision of the web: a place to serve hyperlinked networks of documents. By contrast, a modern website is treated almost as its own application (in some cases, [literally](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progressive_web_application)) with its own interface, its own layout, its own stylistic and content placement standards. And the result of this hodgepodge of design is a web that, while excellent for designers' Behance profiles, is radically different to the vision intended for it. The problem here lies in the lack of visual control enjoyed by the consumer: the designer is the god of their domain, and any heretical changes must be implemented by bodged-together [Tampermonkey](https://www.tampermonkey.net/) scripts and an abundance of dark mode browser extensions. Again, the goal of providing *content* is lost, while appearance reigns supreme.

Leaving philosophy aside, there are practical implications to prescriptivist design. Looking at my domain, ttccourt.com, on [Google PageSpeed Insights](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/?url=ttccourt.com&tab=desktop), one notices that the entirety of the page loads within 0.4 seconds. Taking a look at a [report](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/?url=theguardian.com&tab=desktop) for The Guardian, we can see the page taking over a full second to load its first block of content, and a whopping five seconds to be fully loaded (these scores may vary, but they're accurate as I'm typing this). I'm willing to bet that, no matter how poor your internet connection, my website loads snappily and smoothly for you. The Guardian's? I wouldn't count on it. CNN's [report]() is even worse. Somehow, despite containing fewer images than The Guardian, CNN scores a grand total of 14/100 on Google's PageSpeed calculator. No content is painted at all until two and a half seconds in, and the page is only done loading after almost nine seconds in total. I wouldn't want to read CNN on a dial-up connection.

What's more, prescriptivist design causes problems for more than just the less-bandwidth-endowed among us. As an unashamed lover of the terminal interface (there's something so freeing about not relying on a mouse), I often turn to [Lynx](https://lynx.invisible-island.net/) for quick information lookups. For the uninitiated, Lynx is a text-based web browser that renders HTML content in a terminal. Trying to load many modern webpages with Lynx, however, will result in a mess. Because the content makes logical sense when viewed with all the styling rules applied to it, the designers have taken the liberty of completely neglecting to produce a sensible textual page layout. Even the more GUI-inclined will have noticed this when a cache error or interrupted or slow connection causes a page's HTML to load without the CSS rules applied to it.

{% include image.html url="/assets/post_images/0001.png" description="The layout mess that is produced by rendering CNN's website in Lynx." %}

The solution is not abandoning HTML and CSS entirely, but rather a switch to a new paradigm of web development: *content-based design*. Let's define two ground rules for content-based design:

1. **Put content first and styling later.**
    In the creation of a website, the focus should always be on the content. The content of a website is by far its most important attribute and the one that must be prioritised. Any and all stylistic changes should be made after the content is already written, and designers should keep in mind what the website will look like without them.
2. **Give control to the user.**
    The process of determining the layout, design and appearance of a website is often largely a process of determining what will best appeal to the target audience. Here's a novel idea: let the audience decide. Your users want dark mode? They can set it as a browser-wide default to use dark backgrounds and light text. Your users don't like Capitalised Titles In Their Videos? There's a [Chrome extension](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/clickbait-remover-for-you/omoinegiohhgbikclijaniebjpkeopip) that sets them all to lowercase. Trust users to make these unimportant stylistic decisions themselves.

Neither of these rules is set in stone, nor are they definitive commandments for every web designer. Some level of styling is really not a bad thing, and for the average GUI user who doesn't care for customisation, it's important to keep the experience pleasant. Set a default sans-serif font, make your titles centre-aligned, insert coloured banners if you must. But try to keep these principles in mind, and the web will thank you. I certainly will.